Adding blog post to show case the new PPL capabilities and CLI tool (#3994)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2025-10-29-opensearch-new-ppl-capabilities.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Better observability , deeper insights: OpenSearch's new Piped Processing Language Capabilities"
authors:
- anasalkouz
- ritvibhatt
  date: 2025-10-29
  categories:
- technical-post
  meta_keywords: Piped Processing Language, PPL, observability, log analytics, troubleshoot applications, monitor system performance, analyze security events, CLI tool, Combine datasets within single query, Time-series analysis, Unstructured log processing at query time, Complex data type support.
  meta_description: OpenSearch's Piped Processing Language (PPL) evolves significantly with new and enhanced capabilities that reshape how you handle log analytics and observability workflows. This comprehensive update streamlines how you troubleshoot applications, monitor system performance, and analyze security events, providing essential tools to extract meaningful insights from your observability data. Through enhanced features and refined functionality, teams can navigate complex log analysis with greater precision and clarity.
  has_math: false
  has_science_table: false
---

> OpenSearch's Piped Processing Language (PPL) evolves significantly with new and enhanced capabilities that reshape how you handle log analytics and observability workflows. This comprehensive update streamlines how you troubleshoot applications, monitor system performance, and analyze security events, providing essential tools to extract meaningful insights from your observability data. Through enhanced features and refined functionality, teams can navigate complex log analysis with greater precision and clarity.

Reviewer: "(PPL) ~~evolves~~ evolved significantly"

> OpenSearch's Piped Processing Language (PPL) evolves significantly with new and enhanced capabilities that reshape how you handle log analytics and observability workflows. This comprehensive update streamlines how you troubleshoot applications, monitor system performance, and analyze security events, providing essential tools to extract meaningful insights from your observability data. Through enhanced features and refined functionality, teams can navigate complex log analysis with greater precision and clarity.

Reviewer: This intro is very abstract. Some readers might not know what PPL is, and those that use it might not have a great feeling for what the current state is.

Could we maybe start with a brief introduction of what PPL is and what problem it solves? Something like "PPL is OpenSearch's query language for..."

## What's new in OpenSearch PPL?

> Let's explore the new PPL commands and functions through practical examples of common log analytics use cases. These examples demonstrate how PPL enhanced capabilities can help you analyze logs more effectively, from combining multiple data sources to processing unstructured log data and performing time-series analysis. We'll also cover significant performance improvements in this release, including the integration with Apache Calcite as the query engine.

Reviewer: typo: "how ~~PPL~~ PPL's enhanced..."

### 1. New commands and functions
The OpenSearch 3.3 (https://opensearch.org/blog/explore-opensearch-3-3/) release marks a substantial expansion of PPL functionality with the introduction of 9 new commands, 7 evaluation functions, and 8 statistical functions. The syntax of existing commands has also been refined for improved usability, creating a more intuitive experience for users across various analytical scenarios. Below are scenarios where new commands and functions can help you analyze your data:

#### Combine datasets within single queries ####

> This release enhances PPL data manipulation capabilities with new commands for flexible data combination and field operations. The `append` command combines results from multiple queries into a unified dataset, enabling users to merge data from different sources or time ranges within a single operation. The `join` command combines two datasets together, the left side could be an index or results from a piped commands, the right side could be either an index or a `subsearch`.

Reviewer: I would consider flipping the order of the presentation here

Instead of starting with "here's every combination command we added" and then going to the example, start with the concrete example (starting from "Previously, you couldn't..."), present it, and then go "In addition, we have..."

Example for using `join`

```
# Combines web log data with geographical IP data. 

> # Which allowing you to see which countries generate the most traffic.

Reviewer: typo: "Which ~~allowing~~ allows"

PPL> source = web_logs
  | join type=inner client_ip [source=ip_geodata]

>   | stats count() as total_requests by country

Reviewer: I don't know if it's in scope for this to be beginner-friendly, but I think this is a complicated query to start with.

Including some simpler starting points per the previous comments might make this easier to digest.

Author: I don't think the blog for a beginner. we are trying to highlight some of the new capabilities driven by log analytics real use cases. 
We have enough easy straight forward examples highlighted in documentation and some previous blogs

  
# Result
┏━━━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┓
┃ country  ┃total_requests┃
┡━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┩
│ USA      │ 5            │
├──────────┼──────────────┤
│ Canada   │ 3            │
├──────────┼──────────────┤
│ UK       │ 1            │
└──────────┴──────────────┘
```

#### Time-series analysis ####

> PPL introduces streamlined temporal and distribution analysis with new `timechart`, `bin` and `eventstats` commands. The `timechart` command aggregates data over time intervals with flexible span controls, automatically handling time gap filling and result ordering for time-series analysis. It provides visualization-ready formatting with time as the primary axis and supports grouping by additional fields. The `bin` command automatically groups numeric data into ranges or buckets, facilitating distribution analysis for understanding data spread and frequency patterns. The `eventstats` command which is essential for generating summary statistics from fields in events while *preserving* the original events.

Reviewer: needs a comma: "the `eventstats` command, which is"

These commands make temporal pattern analysis and data distribution modeling more accessible within PPL queries, allowing users to identify trends and outliers directly through query operations. The `earliest` and `latest` functions retrieve timestamp-based values, enabling time-series analysis by finding the earliest or latest occurrence of values within groups based on their timestamps.

Example for using `timechart`

```
# Groups Logs data into 1-hour intervals and count number of logs 
# for each severity level within these intervals
PPL> source=demo-logs-otel-v1-* 

>     | timechart span=1h count() by severityText

Author: There is a response as screen shot from discover. @kolchfa-aws can we test if the image render correctly?

>     | timechart span=1h count() by severityText

Reviewer 2: It renders correctly but please add descriptive sentences on line 53 and here. You can move the comment on lines 56-57 to be the intro sentence. "The following example groups log data into 1-hour intervals and counts the number of logs for each severity level within these intervals" and then "The response contains...."

---
layout: post
title:  "Better observability, deeper insights: OpenSearch's new Piped Processing Language capabilities"
authors:
  - aalkouz
  - ritvibhatt
  - kolchfa

> date: 2025-10-29

Reviewer 3: Update: 2025-11-25

---

Starting with [OpenSearch 3.3](https://opensearch.org/blog/explore-opensearch-3-3/), Piped Processing Language (PPL) includes new and improved capabilities that simplify log analytics and observability workflows. These updates make it easier to troubleshoot applications, monitor performance, and analyze security events.

In this blog post, we'll explore the new PPL commands and functions through practical examples of common log analytics use cases. You'll learn how these enhancements help you combine multiple data sources, process unstructured log data, and perform time-series analysis. We'll also highlight significant performance improvements in the 3.3 release, including the integration of Apache Calcite as the query engine.

## New commands and functions

> OpenSearch 3.3 substantially expands PPL functionality with **nine new commands** and **fifteen new functions**. Additionally, it refines the syntax of existing commands, making them easier to use and creating a more intuitive experience across various analytical scenarios. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
OpenSearch 3.3 substantially expands PPL functionality with **9 new commands** and **15 new functions**. Additionally, it refines the syntax of existing commands, making them easier to use and creating a more intuitive experience across various analytical scenarios. 
```

    ┃ duration ┃ page_url     ┃ session_id ┃ @timestamp          ┃ user_id ┃
    ┡━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━╇━━━━━━━━━┩
    │ 240      │ /product/456 │ sess_001   │ 2025-10-08 10:05:00 │ user123 │
    ├──────────┼──────────────┼────────────┼─────────────────────┼─────────┤
    │ 240      │ /product/456 │ sess_001   │ 2025-10-08 10:05:00 │ user123 │
    ├──────────┼──────────────┼────────────┼─────────────────────┼─────────┤
    │ 300      │ /product/123 │ sess_002   │ 2025-10-08 10:18:00 │ user456 │
    └──────────┴──────────────┴────────────┴─────────────────────┴─────────┘
    ```

## Get involved with PPL

The future of PPL depends on community involvement and feedback. We encourage you to try the new features using the CLI tool and share your experiences with the OpenSearch community. Whether you're exploring new use cases or discovering areas for improvement, your input helps guide the development of our observability capabilities. To make reporting easier, we've provided a [bug report template](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql/issues/new?template=ppl_bug_report.md).

For more information, check out the following resources:

> * [PPL Documentation](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql/blob/main/docs/user/ppl/index.rst)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* [OpenSearch PPL Reference Manual](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql/blob/main/docs/user/ppl/index.rst)
```
